---
layout: post
title: "Week 3, 2021: Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion"
author: Facilitators
date: 2021-07-09
---

# Pre-Discussion Learning Material

[Rankin, Yolanda A., Jakita O. Thomas, and Sheena Erete. "Real talk: saturated sites of violence in CS education." ACM Inroads 12.2 (2021): 30-37.](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3408877.3432432)

Please bring something outside of the paper that helps deepen your understanding of the underlying issues the paper is discussing itself.
This could be a story in the news, a fact or statistic from a talk, a line of reasoning from another paper, a personal experience, a story from a friend, a passage from a book, a poem, a piece of art, really anything.
Aim for something you can present in a minute or two.
This is optional, but encouraged.

# Agenda

* guest introductions (5 min)
* [discussion guidelines](http://www.edchange.org/multicultural/activities/groundrules.html) (5 min)
    * feel free to message me directly during or after the discussion with any concerns
    * if you need to step out of the discussion space, for a few minutes or for the remainder, feel free to do so --- no need to ask for permission or check in (unless you want to)
* roundtable, what additional context helps deepen your understanding? (25 min)
    * be sure to tie back to the discussion paper
    * we'll have a chance for a comment or follow-up or two
* freeform big group discussion (5 min)
* small groups (10 min): what action should we expect from
    * a coworker?
    * a professor or teacher?
    * a dean, principal, or university administrator?
    * a hiring manager or recruiter?
    * a manager or corporate executive?
    * a legislator?
 * report small group highlights to big group & discuss (10 min) 
