---
layout: post
title: "Week 14: Polymorphism & Object-Oriented Programming"
author: Matthew Andres Moreno
---

## Pre-Class Learning Material

1. [CppCon 2019: Jon Kalb “Back to Basics: Object-Oriented Programming”](https://youtu.be/32tDTD9UJCE?t=282)
  * start at 4:42, watch until 28:30
  * introduces object-oriented programming, discusses some design best practices
  * rest of the talk discusses implementation best practices (reccommended!)
2. [Better Code: Runtime Polymorphism - Sean Parent](https://youtu.be/QGcVXgEVMJg?t=108)
  * start at 1:48, watch until 38:21
  * discusses a solution for runtime polymorphism without an inheritance-based API
  * middle part goes on a bit of a tangent about copy constructors and saving copies before presenting the complete solution, feel free to fast foward that part
  * rest of the talk adds real-world context and discusses some additional features made straightforward to implement by using the runtime-concept idiom (reccomended!)

## Conversation Starters/Discussion Questions

1. What are the best examples of object-oriented or runtime-polymorphic you've used, maintained, and/or implemented?
What made them great to work with?
2. What are the worst examples of object-oriented or runtime-polymorphic you've used, maintained, and/or implemented?
What made them not so great to work with?
3. How do C++'s polymorphism toolkit/idioms compare to approaches to polymorphism in other languages (Rust? Python? etc.)? 
4. From the Sean Parent YouTube comments... (WON YOO)
  > I see global draw() function can be specifically defined with different types if I want to have a different behavior in the function other than a template function defines.
  > Wouldn't this pattern cause developers less convenient to find what methods can be overridden or not unlike the traditional polymorphism? For example, in traditional inheritance, if a method is virtual, I can know that can be overridden.
5. Also from the Sean Parent YouTube comments... (Rob Inson)
  > How is it different from the pimpl idiom? ...
