---
layout: post
title: "Week 1: Version control with git and Github"
author: Emily Dolson
---

## What are we going to be talking about and why?

Git is a program that keeps track of changes that different people make to a piece of software and facilitates merging them together. While git is useful for projects of all sizes, for as complex a collaborative project as Empirical, MABE, or Avida it is absolutely essential. It lets us all work on the code at once, undo changes that break stuff, and keep track of what state the code was in when used it to run a set of experiments (important for doing science!). 

Github is a website where people host git repositories.


## Pre-Discussion Learning Material


*



## Conversation Starters/Discussion Questions

1. What license do you think scientific software should use?
2. TODO
3. TODO
4. TODO
5. TODO


## Other resources
* [Software carpentry lesson on git](http://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/): This is a tutorial that covers all the most important features of git in a way that's easy to follow along with on your own. It's also the resource most of my demo was drawn from.
* [Refined github](https://github.com/sindresorhus/refined-github): this is a browser extension that I recently discovered and totally love. It alters GitHub to add additional features. They're mostly on the advanced side, so this might be something to check out once you're comfortable with the standard interface. My favorite feature is that it gives you a button to revert changes on a file that you accidentally included in a pull request.
